Do you still think that high-quality programming skills, knowing SOLID principles, writing maintenable tests is enough for you to be
called a professional? Let's elaborate this topic.

When I was young and ~~stupid~~ passionate about high-quality programming, all my attention was drawn by maintenable, flexible and easily readable code. I was reading hell a lot of literature on this - both books and articles. Later on I started to teach others. I was conducting webinars & tech sessions (both at work and on the internet), writing articles and discussing these topics at [JTalks](http://jtalks.org). And I still continue on this, though way less actively.

But this passion was leaving me. Gradually, year by year. First of all because I had another passion now - Continuous Deliver, and
second - it started to seem that people who are well-educated in programming can harm projects dramatically. Here is the best example
in my career that illustrates what I'm talking about:

----
At some point of my life I decided to join a startup. It seemed to be a good option to me: they used modern technologies and frameworks and during the interview they asked me about best practices which was a promising sign. Moreover teleworking was really handy to me at that time. So here I am resigned from my regular job for the sake of intriguing startup. 
From the first days it started to look wrong: they didn't have daily meet-ups to be in synch with each other (there were weekly meetings which is pretty rare) and they had a dozen of repos in VCS - too many for the first months of the project! That seemed suspicious, and it didn't turn better.. 
It appeared that last couple of weeks were spent for designing domain model and database scheme (wat?). And they were not there yet! I started to be involved in all this designing and I found that every team member suggested their vision of the model. And here comes the discussion.. That discussion was overwhelmed with buzz-words like "Best Practices", "OOD", "Performance" and in the end they chose the most complex scheme suggested.
I appealed to the customer who (surprise-surprise!) was an ex-developer with questions and suggestions on improving the current situation:
- Team communicated once in a week, for that project that meant they worked couple of days and then waited several days for the meeting to share their thoughts. That's extremely ineffective.
- They started with distributed storage, complex designing and performance in mind while there was nothing to optimize and refactor yet.

But the customer, even though he was irritated by the fact that there was nothing ready by that time, was too involved into technical details. He was possessed with "we should implement it in a right way!". To me that was too ineffective for such a small-budget project. So call me a rat, but I left that sinking boat after 2 weeks of struggling. I denied to take money from the customer, I knew he'd need them in the near future. Couple of years have passed, but on their website I still see 'Coming soon..'.

----

That situation was a good lesson to me - I started to realise how stubborn and selfish I was in the past. I recall working in a small company where I was asked to write a tiny project to mix some videos, list them and show them to the users who can vote. The project had a budget for 2 months and I could it make! But I was too blind because of good practices and maintainability. I introduced complex technologies, caching; of course I split the project into different layers and added a lot of extra interfaces for flexibility. Should I say I missed deadline? Surely I did. I was asked why it took me that long, but it was hard for managers to understand the importance of that complexity. Now it's hard even for myself! That project didn't require maintainability, extensibility, flexibility or any other "bility", it didn't! No changes were made to that project since then. In retrospective I understand that all that crap was needed for myself, I was selfish. I needed to ramp up my skills (which is of course important), but I did it at the expense of missed deadline. And now, when I hear developers critisizing managers, I'm careful in supporting the conversation. Because who knows, who knows..

I don't want to say that well-written code is bad, I don't! And neither I defend bad-smelling code. But both extremes are equally bad. Both situation lead to money lost. On one hand it's possible to end up with a mess that's impossible to maintain and which leads to lots of nasty bugs. On the other hand the project can die bofore it's even born! 

But you may still say: "Hey, I always write high quality code that doesn't smell and I always spend weeks on careful designing, but my customer doesn't go broke! He still is happy with the results!". Well, that might be true. But first of all, customer doesn't necessarily live on the edge, it's pretty common for the customer to have big funds and even if your project doesn't bring any value, he still might be happy, he just doesn't notice ineffectiveness! And second - in the majority of cases the costs spent on the project development are much smaller than overall spendings on the business. Even if customer heavily relies on the software you work on, there is still plenty of stuff to care about: marketing, 3d party contracts, client-facing offices and personnel, taxes, transport, et cetera, et cetera. So in the end ineffective development might not be *that* important for the business.

Then who cares? If I work a large wealthy company, what's the big deal if I'm ineffective? Here is my perspective on this:
- There is a moral question: if you get paid, then you probably should be worth your money. This is not a big deal for many people though as most of us are selfish.
- You probably want to get higher on the career ladder. It's more likely to get there if you try to help and make your company better. And it's less likely if you don't want to care about the business of your company.
- Many of us like think of ourselves as professionals. And caring about your product success is another way of being professional. Such people are much more precious to the company than typical I-care-only-about-code engineers.
- Most of the time we don't have such a freedom - we're put into frames, the resources (money, time) are not infinite. And then you start to care not only about quality of the code, but also about delivery and quality of the product. If you put too much accent on code quality, you're missing deadlines.

**Speaking about professionalism.** It's weird to see how arrogant today's programmers are. We're so self-important, so self-important! [(c)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7W33HRc1A6c#t=77) It's very common to hear a programmer mentioning how cool he is and how miserable was that employer he just had interview with. To me that's a STOP sign. If I were to notice such an arrogant behaviour from someone I interview, I wouldn't hire him no matter how cool he is technically. Because these people are selfish, they don't care about the product, they care about coding and getting money from this process. Keep in mind that a businessman doesn't care about source code - he needs a solution. And if you can't provide it, then you'd rather stop calling yourself a professional.

I used to work in one outstaff company. It has a customer and even though officially we were employed for that company, we still worked on the customer. That was a very frustrating job - our off-shore team was much more experienced in programming, really strong team. Meanwhile on-site team was pretty weak technically. But this fact didn't matter for the customer, on-site team is always more important than off-shore. Why? They write code the way customer spends a lot of money for the maintenance afterwards, why the heck they are in charge of the project? That's again because albeit our off-shore team was experienced in programming, we were much weaker in the business we were providing service for. Only on-site team could talk directly to stake-holders, only on-site team knew what should be the result. Yes, they were writing an expensive-to-maintain code, but in the meanwhile they were solving business tasks! While we simply didn't have enough strings to pull and business knowledge to put into the work.

For me it's not clear that it's more important to deliver a successful product rather than use modern tools and have 100% code coverage. And after that I started to notice that people who care about quality most and who use buzz-words like Best Practices are the least efficient overall (I'm not talking about short-term progress, I'm talking about overall!). With their approach projects get overly complicated too soon and it ain't add up to the readability. And now if I hear this "Best Practices", this is a good sign that person doesn't quite understand the subject, that he hides his lack of knowledge under these words. *An experienced programmer uses arguments and facts instead of authority of best practices*. 

The last point on technical vs. business skills: our purpose as engineers is to make money for the employer. This can be done either by reducing costs or by creating new business value. And thus:
- With poor technical skills and good business knowledge you're creating a software that makes money
- With good technical skills and poor business knowledge you're creating a software that reduces costs, but doesn't provide as much business value.
And therefore by caring about business you're adding new value and by being a good programmer you reduce cost. Combine these traits, know when to write good and when to write fast. And be twice as effective!

**How do you learn if you care about business?** Of course in order to be a good programmer, you have to learn new stuff and be up-to-date with technologies. A good rule on this - one new technology in the project is enough. It's much better to be home with your family than meeting New Year at work fixing bugs because of newly introduced tools.
